---
title: "Closed Sets and Limit Points"

categories:
  - Topology

tags:
  - closed set
  - interior
  - closure
  - limit points
 

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

use_math : true
comments : true

---

## Definition (Closed)
A subset $A$ of a topological space $X$ is said to be **closed** if the set $X-A$ is open.


## Theorem 17.1
Let $(X,\mathfrak{T})$ be a topological space. Then the following conditions hold

(1) $\emptyset$ and $X$ are closed.

(2)  Arbitrary intersections of closed set is closed.

(3) Finite union of closed sets are closed. i.e.,


<*proof*>

(1) $\emptyset$ and $X$ are closed since their complements are $X$ and $\emptyset$, which are open.

(2) Let $\\{F_\alpha\\}_{\alpha\in\Lambda}$ be a collection of closed set. Then

$$
\begin{align*}
X-\bigcap_{\alpha\in\Lambda}F_\alpha &= X\cap\left(\bigcap_{\alpha\in\Lambda}F_\alpha\right)^c \\
&=X \cap \left(\bigcup_{\alpha\in\Lambda}F^c_\alpha \right) \\
&=\bigcup_{\alpha\in\Lambda}\left(X\cap F^c_\alpha \right) \\
&=\bigcup_{\alpha\in\Lambda}\left(X - F_\alpha \right) 
\end{align*}
$$

Since $X-F_\alpha$ is open and union of them are also open. Thus the arbitrary intersections of closed sets are closed.

(3) Let $F_1,\ldots, F_n$ be closed sets. 

$$
\begin{align*}
X-\bigcup_{i=1}^nF_i &= X\cap\left(\bigcup_{i=1}^nF_i \right)^c \\
&=X\cap \left(\bigcap_{i=1}^nF^c_i \right) \\ 
&=\bigcap_{i=1}^n(X\cap F^c_i) \\
&=\bigcap_{i=1}^n(X - F_i)
\end{align*}
$$

Since $X-F_i$ is open and finite intersections of open sets are open. Thus, the finite union of closed sets are closed.

$$\tag*{$\square$}$$

## Theorem 17.2
Let $(Y,\mathfrak{T}_Y)$ be a subspace of $(X,\mathfrak{T}_X)$. Then a set $A$ is closed in $Y$ if and only if $A=F\cap Y$ for some closed $F$ in $X$.

<*proof*>

Suppose that $A$ is closed in $Y$.  Then $Y-A$ is open in $Y$, i.e., $Y-A=U\cap Y$ for some open $U$ in $X$. We want to show that $A= (X-U)\cap Y$. We know that 

$$
\begin{align*}
Y - (Y-A) &= Y\cap(Y\cap A^c)^c \\
&=Y\cap (Y^c \cup A) \\
&= (Y\cap Y^c)\cup (Y\cap A) \\
&=Y\cap A \\
&=A \quad (\because A\subset Y)
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= Y-(Y-A) \\
&=Y- (U\cap Y) \\
&=Y\cap (U\cap Y)^c \\
&=Y\cap(U^c\cup Y^c) \\
&=(Y\cap U^c)\cup (Y\cap Y^c) \\
&=Y\cap U^c \\
&=Y\cap(X-U)
\end{align*}
$$

Since $U$ is open in $X$, $X-U$ is closed in $X$. Thus, $A$ is equals to the intersection of a closed set of $X$ with $Y$.

Conversely, suppose that $A=F\cap Y$ for some closed  $F$ in $X$. We want to show that $Y-A$ is open in $Y$. 

$$
\begin{align*}
Y-A &= Y-(F\cap Y) \\
&=Y\cap(F^c\cup Y^c) \\
&=(Y\cap F^c)\cup (Y\cap Y^c) \\
&=Y\cap F^c \\
&=Y \cap (X-F)
\end{align*}
$$

Since $F$ is closed in $X$, $X-F$ is open in $X$. Thus, $Y-A$ is open in $Y$, i.e., $A$ is closed in $Y$.


$$\tag*{$\square$}$$
## Reference
- James Munkres, **『**Topology**』**, Pearson
